---
title: Vim Hints
layout: default
comments: true
published: true
---

Vim Hints
=========

Vim is an editor with a very large operation set which expands even further
when plugins are factored in. Due to this vastness it is easy to forget some
useful commands and capabilities.

This post is mainly intended to remind myself of some of these capabilities
since my brain can house only so much Vim knowledge.

Related Posts
-------------

* [Vim Tips & Tricks](https://bluz71.github.io/2017/05/15/vim-tips-tricks.html)

* [Vim Plugins I Like](https://bluz71.github.io/2017/05/21/vim-plugins-i-like.html)

* [A few Vim & tmux mappings](https://bluz71.github.io/2017/06/14/a-few-vim-tmux-mappings.html)

Normal mode
-----------

Open the URL under the cursor in a browser.

```viml
gx
```

Delete the character immediately to the left of the cursor.

```viml
X
```

Change the next match of the last search, enter `.` to repeat the change
forward.

```viml
cgn
```

Delete the next match of the last search, enter `.` to repeat the delete
forward.

```viml
dgn
```

Insert Mode
-----------

Carry out a one time normal mode command. The `zz`-centering command is useful
in this situation.

```viml
Ctrl-o<command>
```

Insert from the named register. The `0` yank register is a useful register to
insert from.

```viml
Ctrl-r<reg>
```

Delete the previous word after adding `inoremap <C-b> <C-O>diw` to *~/.vimrc*.

```viml
Ctrl-b
```

Insert a mathematical value, for example `48343 + 1684`.

```viml
Ctrl-r=<mathematical expression>
```

Visual mode
-----------

Repeat the last visual selection.

```viml
gv
```

Change current visual selection to inversed or forced-lower or forced-upper
case.

```viml
~
u
U
```

Visually select current inner or around paragraph.

```viml
vip
vap
```

Visually select current inner or around sentence.

```viml
vis
vas
```

Visually select current inner or around tag.

```viml
vit
vat
```

Sort visual selection.

```viml
:'<,'>sort
```

Unique the visual selection.

```viml
:'<,'>uniq
```

Substitute `old` with `new` in a rectangular visual block.

```viml
:'<,'>s/\%Vold/new/c
```

Command Mode
------------

Undo to an earlier time, for example `50s` or `10m` (50 seconds or 10 minutes).

```viml
:earlier <time>
```

Redo to a later time, for example `50s` or `10m`.

```viml
:later <time>
```

Read in command line generated output.

```viml
:r !<command>
```

For example, append all `txt` filenames from the current directory.

```viml
:r !ls *.txt
```

Delete all lines containing `pattern`.

```viml
:g/<pattern>/d
```

Delete all lines **not** containing `pattern`.

```viml
:v/<pattern>/d
```

List digraphs.

```viml
:h digraph-table
```

Cursor Positioning and Movement
-------------------------------

Move the current cursor line to the top of the screen.

```viml
zt
```

Move the current cursor line to the center of the screen.

```viml
zz
```

Move the current cursor line to the bottom of the screen.

```viml
zb
```

Scroll horizontally half a screen to the right.

```viml
zL
```

Move the cursor to the top line of screen (**H**igh).

```viml
H
```

Move the cursor to the middle line of screen (**M**id).

```viml
M
```

Move the cursor the bottom line of screen (**L**ow).

```viml
L
```

Set a mark in the current file.

```viml
mm
```

Return back to the `m` mark in the current file.

```viml
'm
```

Set a global mark in any file.

```viml
mM
```

Return back to the global `M` mark.

```viml
'M
```

Move forward and backward between paragraphs.

```viml
{
}
```

Move forward and backward between sentences.

```viml
(
)
```

Move to the end of the previous word or WORD.

```viml
ge
gE
```

Scroll window up one line.

```viml
Ctrl-e
```

Scroll window down one line.

```viml
Ctrl-y
```

Navigate to definition under cursor, often by using *tags*.

```viml
Ctrl-]
```

Navigate back to the previous location (**o**ut).

```viml
Ctrl-o
```

Navigate forwards (**i**n). This is the opposite of `Ctrl-o`.

```viml
Ctrl-i
```

Spelling
--------

Suggest a spelling correction.

```viml
z=
```

Move to next spelling error.

```viml
]s
```

Move to the previous spelling error.

```viml
[s
```

Files To Edit
-------------

Edit all `txt` files in the current directory hierarchy.

```viml
% vim  **/*.txt
```

If using Bash please enable `globstar` in your `~/.bashrc` file via the
`shopt -s globstar` statement.

Edit all files that the [ripgrep](https://github.com/BurntSushi/ripgrep)
utility recursively finds contains the term `FOO`.

```viml
% vim $(rg -l FOO)
```

FZF plugin
----------

Usage hint for the [fzf.vim](https://github.com/junegunn/fzf.vim) plugin.

Open a file in a horizontal split.

```viml
<CTRL-x>
```

Open a file in a vertical split.

```viml
<CTRL-v>
```

Grepper plugin
--------------

Usage hint for the [vim-grepper](https://github.com/mhinz/vim-grepper) plugin.

Restrict a [ripgrep](https://github.com/BurntSushi/ripgrep) based search to a
particular filetype.

```viml
:GrepperRg -t<type> <pattern>
```

Ragtag plugin
-------------

Insert mode usage hints for the
[vim-ragtag](https://github.com/tpope/vim-ragtag) plugin.

Close the previous open tag.

```viml
<CTRL-x>/
```

Convert the current word into open and close tags.

```viml
<CTRL-x><Space>
```

Same as previous except split over multiple lines.

```viml
<CTRL-x><Enter>
```

Add `<% %>` template tag.

```viml
<CTRL-x>_
```

Add `<%= %>` template tag.

```viml
<CTRL-x>+
```

Unimpaired plugin
-----------------

Usage hints for the [vim-unimpaired](https://github.com/tpope/vim-unimpaired)
plugin.

Navigate backward and forward through the buffer list.

```viml
[b
]b
```

Navigate up and down through the **q**uickfix list.

```viml
[q
]q
```

Navigate up and down through the **l**ocation list.

```viml
[l
]l
```

Navigate backward and forward through the file list.

```viml
[a
]a
```

Add a blank line above or below the current line.

```viml
[<Space>
]<Space>
```

Toggle search highlights.

```viml
coh
```

Toggle relative line numbers.

```viml
cor
```

Toggle line wrapping.

```viml
cow
```

Toggle cursor cross-hairs.

```viml
cox
```

Ruby plugin
-----------

Usage hints for the [vim-ruby](https://github.com/vim-ruby/vim-ruby)
plugin.

Navigate up and down to the start of method definitions.

```viml
[m
]m
```


Navigate up and down to the end of method definitions.

```viml
[M
]M
```
