---
title: Brave with DuckDuckGo, an alternative to Chrome
layout: default
comments: true
published: false
---

Brave with DuckDuckGo, an alternative to Chrome
===============================================

Google has become omnipresent as technology has become an integral part of
modern life.

With 90% of the market, Google is dominant in web search whilst
also being dominant in web browsing with Google Chrome having 70% of the
market as of May 2019.

With the ubiquity of Google Chrome and Search, Google has unrivaled power to
individually target you with ads based on your online footprint.

For those wishing to reduce their Google footprint, this post will discuss the
[Brave browser](https://brave.com) and [DuckDuckGo
search](https://duckduckgo.com) as viable alternatives to Google Chrome and
Google Search. Switching to these products will reduce your Google footprint
whilst also greatly increasing your privacy.

Privacy Issues with Chrome
--------------------------

I must confess, I was a long time user of Chrome, that being from launch in 2008
up until 2018. I liked Chrome, it was fast, secure, extendable, and most
importantly cross-platform (including Linux).

The inflection point when I soured on Chrome was when Google [merged Google
accounts with Chrome 'Sign in'](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=17942252)
in September of 2018. Prior to this change, in Chrome 69, your Goggle login
(Gmail) was separate from your Chrome *Sign in* (for bookmark synchronization
across multiple devices). Post Chrome 69 logging into your Google account, to
read your Gmail for example, would then result in Chrome simultaneously signing
to Google. Presumably once Chrome is *Signed in* Google can track your activity
the web more easily.

It seems I was not the only one upset by this change, Matthew Green wrote an
excellent article that is still worth a read:

- [Why Iâ€™m done with
    Chrome](https://blog.cryptographyengineering.com/2018/09/23/why-im-leaving-chrome)

XXX: Android auto-login

Brave Browser
-------------

[Brave](https://brave.com) is a modern, private and secure web browser that is
based on the same [Chromium](https://chromium.googlesource.com/chromium/src)
browser and [Blink](https://www.chromium.org/blink) rendering engine that powers
Google Chrome.

The Brave browser is [openly](https://github.com/brave/brave-browser) developed
by [Brave Software](https://github.com/brave) which was co-founded by Brendon
Eich, the creator of [JavaScript](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JavaScript) and
co-founder of [Mozilla](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mozilla), the organization
that makes [Firefox](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Firefox).

Notable privacy-by-default characteristics of Brave:

- Automatically blocks unwanted content, such as tracking cookies and 3rd-party
  ads

- Automatically protects against
  [fingerprinting](https://github.com/brave/brave-browser/wiki/Fingerprinting-Protection-Mode)

- Where possible, insecure connections will be seamlessly be upgraded to
  encrypted connections for secure communication

Similarities of Brave to Chrome:

- Generally similar look and feel

- Multi-platform support, including all major desktop and mobile platforms 

- Cross-platform and cross-device
  [synchronization](https://support.brave.com/hc/en-us/articles/360021218111-How-do-I-set-up-Sync-)

- Compatibility with existing Chrome extensions

Notable Brave [deviations from
Chrome](https://github.com/brave/brave-browser/wiki/Deviations-from-Chromium-(features-we-disable-or-remove)):

- Google account synchronization is disabled

- All features that send data to Google are disabled

- Cookie lifetimes are limited to 7 days

Whilst some of the privacy-focussed characteristics of Brave listed above are
available as browser extensions to Chrome, namely [uBlock
Origin](https://github.com/gorhill/uBlock/) and [HTTPS
Everywhere](https://www.eff.org/https-everywhere), be aware that not all
versions of Chrome support extensions, most frustratingly Chrome on mobile devices.
Also, content-filtering extensions, such as uBlock, run the risk of one day being
black-listed by Google. That will not be an issue for Brave since security and
privacy protections are built-int to the browser itself.

Note, Brave is not the only Chromium-based browser available, other choices
include: [Vivaldi](https://vivaldi.com), [Opera](https://www.opera.com),
[Ungoogled Chromium](https://github.com/Eloston/ungoogled-chromium) and even
Microsoft's [Edge browser](https://www.microsoftedgeinsider.com/en-us).
Personally, I favour Brave above all these alternatives due to: open-source
development, timely updates, cross-platform support including Linux and mobile,
native privacy and security features, and lastly cross-device synchronization.

Brave Settings
--------------

DuckDuckGo
----------

Conclusion
----------

* No reason anyone should use Chrome over Brave. Brave does everything Chrome
  does whislt doing it more securely and privately whilst being very similar to
  Chrome
